---
layout: post
title:  "Fight for the Truth"
date:   2016-11-30 13:40:25 +0800
categories: Personal
comments: yes
---

“It is time to move on.”

We have heard this line countless times already from Marcos apologists, Bongbong Marcos and even from President Duterte. They argue that it is time to stop remembering the dark times of Martial Law because it only causes political division. They want us to <!--excerpt--> look past it, so that we can achieve national unity and finally move forward. Indeed, they must absolutely have little respect to Filipinos to call for a request to forgive and forget after everything we have been through. Nevertheless, in so much as the Marcos family believe they will succeed to reinvigorate our history in their favor, they are essentially challenging our social memory of the twenty-one years Marcos ruled the country.

The recent events of the decision of the Supreme Court to give former President (and dictator) Ferdinand Marcos a burial in the Libingan ng mga Bayani has shocked the country and prompted numerous protests from different organizations. And rightly so, as the go signal from the Supreme Court marking the burial legal gives so much injustice to the victims of Martial law. It has only been a little over 30 years since we came together as one to form the EDSA People Power Revolution to oust Marcos from the presidency and force him to flee from the country. And yet here we are, giving the tyrant ruler a proper burial in no less than in the Libingan ng mga Bayani. How did we go from ostracizing Marcos to honoring him as a hero?

In order to have a clear understanding on how absurd the current issue of the burial of Marcos in the Libingan ng mga Bayani, we need to dive deep and understand the origin and the legacy of the Martial Law regime. Sadly, the implications of this ridiculous attempt to revise Philippine History may not be as obvious to a lot of people. Not everyone understands the depth and complexity of the whole situation. My sister could care less on the recent issue of the burial of Marcos in the Libingan ng mga Bayani. She understands the reason why many people are angry, but she herself does not feel any sense of urgency about the issue because it does not directly affect her. However, the truth is, historical revisionism affects every one of us in more ways than one.

History is a powerful thing. An in-depth study of a nation’s history gives anyone the power to understand the culture of the people and feel the importance of the current affairs of the country. Similarly, a person who holds a dominant influence in the stories of our past can easily define who we are and completely control who we will become in the future. Perhaps, as crooked as a leader Marcos ever was, he was brilliant enough to understand the power of leaving a compelling legacy that made his totalitarian rule look great. He understood the power of history. During his presidency, he held biased elections in which he was the only clear winner, just to show that the people love him. He created the illusion of peace and order by implementing strict laws even though thousands of lives were lost and countless people were tortured. He made everyone believe that he declared Martial Law for the good of the country, just to also make sure that anyone who turned against him were silenced. Moreover, he imposed extreme measures to further strengthen his hold of the country by showcasing government propaganda through his complete control of the media.

Today, we can still feel the effect of his efforts to revitalize Philippine history. Not only are the Marcoses remain one of the most prominent families in the political sphere, many Filipinos are still living in a dream that consider the Marcos era as the “Golden Age of the Philippines.”  In my experience, I still meet people who are diehard Marcos supporters that are brainwashed to believe he was one of the best leaders of the country. They have their own warped universe of their memory of Martial Law. When confronted, they refuse to believe any evidence against the Marcos regime. In the end, they get stuck in their reality loop wherein the only source of their beliefs is from the lies and deception of the Martial Law years.

Hard it may be to admit, many of us have forgotten the dark days of our history with Martial Law. Perhaps, we are just afraid to confront it. As a nation, we just unconsciously choose to forget about it than to relive it. However, the social cost of forgetting the atrocities committed during Martial Law is endless. Let us never forget that thousands of lives were lost. Thousands more were tortured. Billions of pesos were stolen. The greatest mistake we can make as a nation is forgetting the course of our history. The essence of our Filipino identity relies on the history that we have built based on our experiences as a nation. To disregard our history eats away any sense of our national identity. We cease to become the people rooted in this country. Without knowledge of our past, we restart ourselves in a blank slate – easily swayed again by promising words of a bright future only to end up in a return of the ‘Golden Age’ of the next twisted tyrant ruler. In reality, we are only hurting ourselves more by being ignorant of our former selves. At the end of the day, forgetting is not only a crime to our identity as Filipinos but it also tells a frightening dark future of another reiteration of our mistakes. How are we any different from the previous generation if we have learned nothing because we have forgotten our history?

The events of Martial Law must be remembered because our social memory serves as an impenetrable barrier that protects us from it ever happening again. Even though the Supreme Court has decided to bury Marcos in the Libingan ng mga Bayani, the fight for educating people about the truth is still not lost – because how we choose to remember Marcos is something else entirely. Difficult it may be to accept, we have lost the battle in the halls of the Supreme Court. However, we must not feel defeated, be lost and become weary. Instead, we should see these recent events as a call to arms and continue fighting for the truth. More than ever, we need the strength of each of our voices to remind everyone the brutalities of Martial law. We need to stand together and speak up. While the voice of only a minority is faint, by standing together we can shout and be heard. The course of our history is not in the hands of the justices in the halls of a court but in our own remembrance of what truly happened.

> The events of Martial Law must be remembered because our social memory serves as an impenetrable barrier that protects us from it ever happening again.


The words “Never Again” that has been circulating in social media echoes our strong rejection of historical revisionism and ignorance of our past. It marks our stance as Filipinos that we valiantly refuse to accept the outrageous attempt to change the course of our history in favor of the Marcoses.
Certainly, the struggle to fight for the truth will be a never-ending battle. As long as the Marcos family refuses to admit their guilt of their crimes, they will inevitably try to reinvent our history in their favor. Let us not grow tired of fighting for the truth of our nation. Let us remember that the truth will always liberate us from any shackles of oppression and domination. Let us strive to keep our national flame alive and cultivate a social memory that reminds everyone everyday: “Never Again to Martial Law.”

Marcos is not a hero. **Let us make sure he will never be.**
